---
outline: 'deep'
---
# Migrate to the Pixelfed + Docker Compose v2

There are [*a lot* of changes](https://github.com/pixelfed/pixelfed/pull/4844) in how Pixelfed Docker/Docker Compose images work - it's a complete rewrite - with a couple of breaking/significant changes.

But don't worry! This document and the [Migration Guide](#migration-steps) further down covers all of the required changes and steps you need to safely migrate.

We don't take *breaking changes* or *lengthy migration guides* lightly, and future iterations and improvements will be either seamless or *much* smaller in scope and complexity.

We do however believe that the *many* improvements (listed below) are worth it, and sets us up for a brighter future for self-hosted and maintainable Pixelfed servers

## Breaking Changes

::: danger These changes are breaking, removing, or changing existing behavior from Docker Compose v1 and *requires* your attention and possibly some steps to fix.
The [Migration Guide](#migration-steps) has step by step guide for most of these!
:::

### New `Dockerfile` <Badge type="danger" text="Breaking" />

All [runtime variations](../runtimes.md) of Pixelfed on Docker are now build from a single `Dockerfile`, rather than the previously three.

Please see the [Docker Runtimes](../runtimes.md) and [Docker Customization](../customize.md) documentation for more information.

### New Docker Compose file <Badge type="danger" text="Breaking" />

The `docker-compose.yml` file has been rewritten from the ground up to be provide better defaults and more flexible out of the box.

This mean that *most* things you would likely want to tweak can be controlled from your `.env` config file, like installing additional APT Packages, PECL/PHP extensions, changing PHP version, modifying PHP settings (such as `memory_limit`), disabling specific services, changing where data and config files are stored, and so on.

### New `.env` / `.env.docker` file <Badge type="danger" text="Breaking" />

The starter `.env.docker` file has been *significantly* expanded with most of the Pixelfed settings available, along with many Docker Compose specific ones.

Your Pixelfed specific settings are (of course) unchanged, but you need to configure them again after copying the new `.env.docker` file.

### Using `bind` volumes <Badge type="danger" text="Breaking" />

The old `docker-compose.yml` configuration file [declared four anonymous Docker volumes](https://github.com/pixelfed/pixelfed/blob/b1ff44ca2f75c088a11576fb03b5bad2fbed4d5c/docker-compose.yml#L72-L76) for storing Pixelfed related data within.

These are no longer used, instead favoring a [Docker bind volume](https://docs.docker.com/storage/bind-mounts/) approach where content is stored directly on the server disk, outside
of a Docker volume.

The consequence of this change is that *all* data stored in the - now unsupported - Docker volumes will no longer be accessible by Pixelfed.

* The `db-data` volume *definitely* contains important data - it's your database, after all!
* The `app-storage` volume *definitely* contains important data - it's files uploaded to - or seen by - your server!
* The `redis-data` volume *might* contain important data (depending on your configuration)
* The `app-bootstrap` volume does not contain any important data - all of it will be generated automatically in the new setup on startup. We will *not* be migrating this!

::: tip Please see the [Migration steps](#migration-steps) section for information on moving your data.
:::

### No Docker networks <Badge type="danger" text="Breaking change" />

The `docker-compose.yml` no longer include any custom networks, instead favoring the simplicity of the default `bridge` network.

The published ports can be configured via your `.env` file, look for the `DOCKER_*_HOST_PORT` keys.

## Changes needing attention

::: warning These changes are mostly informational and unlikely to cause any issues during upgrade, but included for visibility and in case your specific set up require them to be changed.
:::

### New Redis version <Badge type="warning" text="Attention needed" />

Redis has been upgraded from using the last version `5` release to using the latest `7.2` version instead - favoring the `debian` variant instead of `alpine`.

The Redis version can be controlled in your `.env` file via `DOCKER_REDIS_VERSION`.

If you want to keep using the Redis version set `DOCKER_REDIS_VERSION="5-alpine"` in your `.env` file.

If you want to use `7.2` but the alpine variant, simply append `-alpine` to the `DOCKER_REDIS_VERSION` (e.g. `DOCKER_REDIS_VERSION=7.2-alpine`).

### Pinned MariaDB version <Badge type="warning" text="Attention needed" />

The included `db` service is now pinned to MariaDB `11.2` instead of `latest`.

You can revert to the previous setting by setting `DB_VERSION="latest"` in your `.env` file.

### Automatic "One-time setup tasks" <Badge type="warning" text="Attention needed" />

This is also covered in the [migration guide](#migration-steps) but existing Pixelfed instances need to disable the automatic run of [One-time setup tasks](../../generic/installation.md#one-time-setup-tasks) by setting `DOCKER_APP_RUN_ONE_TIME_SETUP_TASKS=0` in your `.env` file.

Your container *will* fail to start up if these are already configured for your site.

## New or improved features

::: tip All the new and exciting features and capabilities. :rocket:

This is where we hope we can convince you that the breaking changes and migration work was worth it :heart:
:::

### Nginx Proxy service <Badge type="tip" text="New" />

The new `docker-compose.yml` includes an *optional* (but enabled by default) Nginx Proxy for SSL/TLS termination.

Please see [`How do I use my own Proxy server?`](../faq.md#how-do-i-use-my-own-proxy-server) and `DOCKER_PROXY_*` keys in the `.env` file for more information.

### LetsEncrypt/ACME service <Badge type="tip" text="New" />

The new `docker-compose.yml` includes an *optional* (but enabled by default) ACME/LetsEncrypt service that when combined with the new Nginx Proxy automatically creates and maintains your SSL/TLS certificates.

Please see [`How do I use my own SSL certificate?`](../faq.md#how-do-i-use-my-own-ssl-certificate) and `DOCKER_PROXY_*` + `LETSENCRYPT_*` keys in the `.env` file for more information.

### Automatic run of "One-time setup tasks" <Badge type="tip" text="New" />

When you set up a new Pixelfed server, there is handful of commands you need to run once (and only once) - these are called [One-time setup tasks](../../generic/installation.md#one-time-setup-tasks).

These steps are now automatically run for you when [creating a new Pixelfed server](../installation.md).

### Extensive documentation <Badge type="tip" text="New" />

How to run and use the new Docker setup has been documented extensively. Not only on *this* page, but also in all the new scripts, `Dockerfile`, and `.env.docker` file.

We hope this will make it much easier to confidently and comfortably run your Pixelfed server with Docker - and when things *do* go wrong, the debugging and fixing of the issue much easier and quicker.

### Automatic publishing of Docker images <Badge type="tip" text="Improved" />

Going forward we will automatically build and push Docker images for Pixelfed to both [Docker Hub](https://hub.docker.com/r/jippi/pixelfed) and [GitHub Container Registry](https://github.com/jippi/pixelfed/pkgs/container/pixelfed).

We will automatically be pushing all combinations of [our supported Docker runtimes](../runtimes.md) and PHP version (8.1, 8.2 and soon 8.3).

Further more, testing Pull Requests has never been easier, as we will also build and push Docker images for all Pull Requests with tag prefix `pr-{ID}` (e.x. `pixelfed/pixelfed:pr-4844-apache-8.2`).

You can control which Pixelfed release you use via the `DOCKER_APP_RELEASE` key/value pair in your `.env` file.

### Customizable `Dockerfile` <Badge type="tip" text="New" />

It's now possible to tweak many Docker related settings without copying or forking Pixelfed Dockerfile!

The new Dockerfile has many [Build Arguments](../customize.md#build-settings-arguments) (e.g., `--build-arg`) allowing you to easily

* [Change your PHP version](../customize.md#php_version)
* [Install extra PECL extensions](../customize.md#php_pecl_extensions)
* [Install extra PHP extensions](../customize.md#php_extensions)
* [Install extra APT packages](../customize.md#apt_packages_extra)
* [Change Debian version](../customize.md#php_debian_release)

All of these (and more) settings are controlled from your `.env` file, and you simply need to run `docker compose build` to build your own bespoke version of Pixelfed on your server!

### Customizable `ENTRYPOINT` <Badge type="tip" text="New" />

Do you want to [run a script on container start up?](../customize.md#run-script-on-startup) Or perhaps to [disable a specific init script?](../customize.md#disabling-entrypoint-or-individual-scripts) Or even [disable all of the init scripts?](../customize.md#disabling-entrypoint-or-individual-scripts)

Now you can! And like with all the other settings it's just a setting in your `.env` file!

### Templating files <Badge type="tip" text="New" />

The new `ENTRYPOINT` system offers an [extensible and flexible way for you to template configuration files](../customize.md#templating) such as your `php.ini` during container start up.

The templating system has access to all settings from your `.env` file, and you can [easily add your own templates!](../customize.md#file-path-examples)

### Automatic PHP/Web server configuration <Badge type="tip" text="New" />

Thanks to the new [templating system](../customize.md#templating) we now automatically calculate and configure required PHP / Web server settings for you - using your `.env` settings - such as

* (php.ini) `upload_max_filesize` with this formula `(MAX_PHOTO_SIZE * MAX_ALBUM_LENGTH) + BUFFER`
* (php.ini) `post_max_size` with this formula `(MAX_PHOTO_SIZE * MAX_ALBUM_LENGTH) + BUFFER`
* (php.ini) `max_file_uploads` using `MAX_ALBUM_LENGTH`
* (php.ini) `memory_limit` using `PHP_MEMORY_LIMIT`
* (php.ini) `[Date]date.timezone` using `APP_TIMEZONE`

### Permission auto-fixing <Badge type="tip" text="New" />

If your installation for some reason has issues with permissions to files/directories, you can now automatically [fix ownership and permissions on start up](../customize.md#fixing-ownership-on-startup).

This is an opt-in feature.

### Faster Docker image building <Badge type="tip" text="Improved" />

We now utilize [BuildKit](https://docs.docker.com/build/buildkit/), [layer caching](https://docs.docker.com/build/cache/backends/), [multi-stage](https://docs.docker.com/build/building/multi-stage/), and [multi-platform](https://docs.docker.com/build/building/multi-platform/) to *really* speed up the building of Docker images.

Under ideal conditions, a `docker compose build` can now complete in less than a minute for most PHP changes. This of course also improve the speed of building Docker images in GitHub Actions and CI!

### Fork friendly Docker releasing <Badge type="tip" text="New" />

Forks of Pixelfed that have enabled GitHub Actions should *automatically* have the same Docker build + push experience as pixelfed/pixelfed have.

The `docker` workflow will by default build + push to the GitHub Container Registry for the project the commit was made to, meaning any downstream projects will not have to fork or modify their `docker` workflow to have a reliable release proccess.

Forks can further more set GitHub Actions Project variables `DOCKER_HUB_USERNAME`, `DOCKER_HUB_ORGANISATION`, `DOCKER_HUB_REPO` and `DOCKER_HUB_TOKEN` for automatic pushing of images to Docker Hub as well. Please see the `.github/workflows/docker.yml` file for more information.

## Migration steps

::: info
This is a best-effort guide to help migrate off the old system. The operation is potentially complicated (and risky), so please be careful!
:::

::: danger
***PLEASE MAKE SURE TO BACKUP YOUR SERVER AND DATA BEFORE ATTEMPTING A MIGRATION***

**YOUR INSTANCE WILL BE *DOWN* WHILE DOING THE MIGRATION; PLEASE PLAN ACCORDINGLY; DEPENDING ON DATA SIZE IT COULD TAKE ANYWHERE FROM 5 *MINUTES* TO 5 *HOURS***
:::

### 1) Backup

1. Make sure to back up your server (ideally *after* step 1 below has been completed, but *before* is better than not at all!)
1. Capture the current Git version / Pixelfed release you are on (e.g., `git --no-pager log -1` outputs the commit reference as the 2nd word in the first line)
1. Backup your `.env` file (we will do this in step 3 as well)
1. Backup your `docker-compose.yml` file (`cp docker-compose.yml docker-compose.yml.old`)
1. Read through the *entire* document before starting

### 2) Migrate `.env` file

The new `.env` file for Docker is a bit different from the old one (many new settings!) so the easiest is to grab the new `.env.docker` file and modify it from scratch again.

```bash
cp .env .env.old
wget -O .env.new https://raw.githubusercontent.com/jippi/pixelfed/jippi-fork/.env.docker
```

Then open your old `.env.old` configuration file, and for each of the key/value pairs within it, find and update the key in the new `.env.new` configuration file.

Don't worry, though; the file might *look* different (and significantly larger), but it behaves *exactly* the way the old file did; it just has way more options!

::: tip
Don't worry if a key is missing in `.env.new`; you can add those key/value pairs back to the new file - ideally in the `Other configuration` section near the end of the file - but anywhere *should* be fine.
:::

This is a great time to review your settings and familiarize yourself with all the new ones.

::: info
In *particular* the following sections

* `PHP configuration` section (near the end of the file) where
  * The `DOCKER_APP_PHP_VERSION` settings control your PHP version
  * The `PHP_MEMORY_LIMIT` settings control your PHP memory limit
* `Docker Specific configuration` section (near the end of the file) where
  * The `DOCKER_ALL_HOST_DATA_ROOT_PATH` setting dictates where the newly migrated data will live.
  * The `DOCKER_APP_RUN_ONE_TIME_SETUP_TASKS` controls whether the `One-time setup tasks` should run. We do *not* want this since your Pixelfed instance is already set up!
* [Frequently Asked Question / FAQ](../faq.md)
  * [How do I use my own Proxy server?](../faq.md#how-do-i-use-my-own-proxy-server)
  * [How do I use my own SSL certificate?](../faq.md#how-do-i-use-my-own-ssl-certificate)
:::

### 3) Stop containers

::: warning
This will take your Pixelfed instance offline
:::

Stop *all* running containers (web, worker, redis, db)

```bash
docker compose down
```

### 4) Update source code

Update your project to the latest release of Pixelfed by running:

```bash
git pull origin $release
```

::: info
The `$release` can be any valid git reference like `dev,` `staging`, or a [tagged release](https://github.com/pixelfed/pixelfed/releases) such as `v0.12.0`.
:::

### 5) Migrate data

The migration guide temporarily branches into two paths here:

* [**Path A**](#a-anonymous-volumes) if you used Docker Anonymous Volumes.
* [**Path B**](#b-bindhost-volumes) if you used host/bind volumes.

::: tip Which Docker volume type am I using?
If your old `docker-compose.yml` had a `volumes` configuration section like below, you used should follow [Path A](#a-anonymous-volumes).

This is also what the v1 `docker-compose.yml` file for pixelfed/pixelfed used.

```yaml
volumes:
  db-data:
  redis-data:
  app-storage:
  app-bootstrap:
```

:::

#### A) Anonymous volumes

::: warning
**It's important to note that this is a *copy* operation - so disk usage will (temporarily) double while you migrate**

We provide a "migration container" for your convenience that can access both the new and old volumes, allowing you to copy the data into the setup.

You can use `mv` (move files) instead of `rsync` in the guide below - but this is a be a *destructive* action, so you can't quickly roll back to your old setup, as the data no longer exists in the anonymous Docker volumes.
:::

##### A1) Run migration container

You can access the Docker container with both old and new volumes by running the following command:

```bash
docker compose -f docker-compose.migrate.yml run migrate bash
```

This will put you in the `/migrate` directory within the container, containing 9 directories like shown here:

```plain
|-- app-storage
|   |-- new
|   `-- old
|-- db-data
|   |-- new
|   `-- old
`-- redis-data
    |-- new
    `-- old
```

##### A2) Check old folders

First thing we want to do is to check if the data inside the container looks correct!

The following commands should all return *SOME* files and data - if they do not - then there might be an issue with the anonymous volume binding.

::: info
The content of the old folders may not be *exactly* whats show in the examples below - if a couple of the files or folders match, it's extremely likely it's correct!
:::

```bash
$ ls app-storage/old
app  debugbar  docker  framework  logs
oauth-private.key  oauth-public.key  purify

# Redis data might also be entirely empty, thats *okay*
$ ls redis-data/old
appendonlydir server.pid

$ ls db-data/old
aria_log_control  ddl_recovery-backup.log  ib_buffer_pool  ib_logfile0
ibdata1  mariadb_upgrade_info  multi-master.info  mysql
performance_schema  pixelfed_prod  sys  undo001  undo002  undo003
```

##### A3) Check new folders

The following commands should all return *NO* files and data - if they contain data - you need to delete it (backup first!) or skip that migration step.

If you haven't run `docker compose up` since you updated your project in step (2) - they should be empty and good to go.

```bash
ls app-storage/new
ls db-data/new
ls redis-data/new
```

##### A4) Copy data

::: warning
This is where we potentially will double your disk usage (temporarily)
:::

Now we will copy the data from the old volumes to the new ones.

The migration container has [`rsync`](https://www.digitalocean.com/community/tutorials/how-to-use-rsync-to-sync-local-and-remote-directories) installed - which is perfect for that kind of work!

**NOTE** It's important that the "source" (first path in the `rsync` command) has a trailing `/` - otherwise, the directory layout will turn out wrong!

**NOTE** Depending on your server, these commands might take some time to finish; each command should provide a progress bar with a rough time estimation.

**NOTE** `rsync` should preserve ownership, permissions, and symlinks correctly for you and all the files copied.

Let's copy the data by running the following commands:

```bash
rsync -avP app-storage/old/ app-storage/new
rsync -avP db-data/old/ db-data/new
rsync -avP redis-data/old/ redis-data/new
```

##### A5) Sanity checking

Let's make sure everything is copied over successfully!

Each *new* directory should contain *something* like (but not always exactly) the following - **NO** directory should have a single folder called `old`; if they do, the `rsync` commands above didn't work correctly - and you need to move the content of the `old` folder into the "root" of the `new` folder like shown a bit in the following sections.

The **redis-data/new** directory might also contain a `server.pid`

```bash
$ ls redis-data/new
appendonlydir
```

The **app-storage/new** directory should look *something* like this

```bash
$ ls app-storage/new
app  debugbar  docker  framework  logs  oauth-private.key  oauth-public.key  purify
```

The **db-data/new** directory should look *something* like this. There might be a lot of files or very few files, but there *must* be a `mysql`, `performance_schema`, and `${DB_DATABASE}` (e.g., `pixelfed_prod` directory)

```bash
$ ls db-data/new
aria_log_control  ddl_recovery-backup.log  ib_buffer_pool  ib_logfile0  ibdata1  mariadb_upgrade_info  multi-master.info  mysql  performance_schema  pixelfed_prod  sys  undo001  undo002  undo003
```

If everything looks good, type `exit` to leave the migration container.

#### B) Bind/Host volumes

If you used Bind/Host volumes, then this guide can't offer any hard step-by-step guide to move your data, but instead will let you know how things would look if you started from scratch, so you can mirror or change this behavior.

In your `.env` file, the following KEY/VALUE pairs controls where your data and config files will go - please review each and make sure your files are in these paths, or adjust them to fit your current layout.

::: tip You can see in the `docker-compose.yml` file for each `service volume` section how they are used.
:::

* `DOCKER_ALL_HOST_DATA_ROOT_PATH` - The "root" path for all service data.

  Default: `./docker-compose-state/data`

* `DOCKER_ALL_HOST_CONFIG_ROOT_PATH` - The "root" path for all service configs.

  Default: `./docker-compose-state/config`

* `DOCKER_APP_HOST_STORAGE_PATH` (`/var/www/storage`) - Path for Pixelfed `storage`, e.x., uploads by users, emojis, and such

  Default: `${DOCKER_ALL_HOST_DATA_ROOT_PATH}/pixelfed/storage`

* `DOCKER_APP_HOST_CACHE_PATH` (`/var/www/bootstrap/cache`)

  Path for Pixelfed `bootstrap/cache` data.

  Default: `${DOCKER_ALL_HOST_DATA_ROOT_PATH}/pixelfed/cache`

* `DOCKER_REDIS_HOST_DATA_PATH`

  Path where `Redis` will store it's data.

  Default: `${DOCKER_ALL_HOST_DATA_ROOT_PATH}/redis`

* `DOCKER_DB_HOST_DATA_PATH`

  Path where your database (`MariaDB`) store it's data.

  Default: `${DOCKER_ALL_HOST_DATA_ROOT_PATH}/db`

### 6) Start containers

With all an updated Pixelfed (step 2), updated `.env` file (step 3), and migrated data (steps 4, 5, 6, and 7), we're ready to start things back up again.

But before we start your Pixelfed server, let's put the new `.env` file we made in step 1 in its proper place.

```bash
cp .env.new .env
```

#### The Database

The first thing we want to try is to start up the database by running the following command and checking the logs:

```bash
docker compose up -d db
docker compose logs --tail 250 --follow db
```

If there are no errors and the server isn't crashing, great! If you have an easy way of connecting to the database via a GUI or CLI client, do that as well and verify the database and tables are all there.

#### Redis

The next thing we want to try is to start up the Redis server by running the following command and checking the logs:

```bash
docker compose up -d redis
docker compose logs --tail 250 --follow redis
```

if there are no errors and the server isn't crashing, great!

#### Worker

The next thing we want to try is to start up the Worker server by running the following command and checking the logs:

```bash
docker compose up -d worker
docker compose logs --tail 250 --follow worker
```

The container should output a *lot* of logs from the [docker-entrypoint system](../customize.md#run-script-on-startup), but *eventually* you should see these messages

* `Configuration complete; ready for start up`
* `Horizon started successfully.`

If you see one or both of those messages, the worker seems to be running.

If the worker is crash looping, inspect the logs and try to resolve the issues.

You can consider the following additional steps:

* Enabling `DOCKER_APP_ENTRYPOINT_DEBUG`, which will show even more log output to help understand what is going on
* Enabling `DOCKER_APP_ENSURE_OWNERSHIP_PATHS` against the path(s) that might have permission issues
* Fixing permission issues directly on the host since your data should all be in the `${DOCKER_ALL_HOST_DATA_ROOT_PATH}` folder (`./docker-compose-state/data` by default)

#### Web

The final service, `web,` will bring your site back online! What a journey it has been.

Let's get to it: run these commands to start the `web` service and inspect the logs.

```bash
docker compose up -d web
docker compose logs --tail 250 --follow web
```

The output should be identical to that of the `worker`, so please see that section for debugging tips if the container is crash looping.

If the `web` service comes online without issues, start the rest of the (optional) services, such as the `proxy`, if enabled, by running:

```bash
docker compose up -d
docker compose logs --tail 250 --follow
```

If you changed anything in the `.env` file while debugging, some containers might restart now; that's perfectly fine.

### 7) Verify

With all services online, it's time to go to your browser and check everything is working.

1. Upload and post a picture
1. Comment on a post
1. Like a post
1. Check Horizon (`https://${APP_DOMAIN}/horizon`) for any errors
1. Check the Docker compose logs via `docker compose logs --follow`

If everything looks fine, yay, you made it to the end! Let us do some cleanup

### 8) Cleanup

With everything working, please take a new snapshot/backup of your server *before* we do any cleanup. A post-migration snapshot is handy since it contains both the old and new configuration + data, making any recovery much easier in a rollback scenario later.

Now, with all the data in the new folders, you can delete the old Docker Container volumes (if you want, completely optional)

List all volumes and give them a look:

```bash
docker volume ls
```

The volumes we want to delete *end* with the volume name (`db-data`, `app-storage`, `redis-data`, and `app-bootstrap`.) but have some prefixes in front of them.

Once you have found the volumes in in the list, delete each of them by running:

```bash
docker volume rm $volume_name_in_column_two_of_the_output
```

You can also delete the `docker-compose.yml.old` and `.env.old` files since they are no longer needed:

```bash
rm docker-compose.yml.old
rm .env.old
```

## Rollback

Oh no, something went wrong? No worries; you have backups and a quick way back!

### Move `docker-compose.yml` back

```bash
cp docker-compose.yml docker-compose.yml.new
cp docker-compose.yml.old docker-compose.yml
```

### Move `.env` file back

```bash
cp env.old .env
```

### Go back to the old source code version

```bash
git checkout $commit_id_from_step_0
```

### Start things back up

```bash
docker compose up -d
```

### Verify it worked

See [Step 7](#7-verify) for recommended steps to verify everythin is working
