# Docker Compose v3

!!! warning "This doc is WIP and may include wrong or incomplete information"

!!! tip "v2 to v3?!... oh no, not again!"

    Docker Compose v2 was a *huge* change, requiring a lot of (risky) work to get migrated. v3 will be significantly smaller, and should largely be a drop-in experience, outside of some relatively simple cleanup/move-files-around tasks due to `docker-pixelfed` not being in the main source tree any more.

Changes made from between the [Docker Compose v2](v2.0.md) version in upstream Pixelfed and this project.

This document assume you are running [Docker Compose v2](v2.0.md) already and is looking to move to v3.

## Breaking Changes

!!! danger "These changes are breaking, removing, or changing existing behavior from Docker Compose v1 and *requires* your attention and possibly some steps to fix."

### <!-- md:flag breaking-change --> New Docker image names { data-toc-label="New Docker image names" }

Since `docker-pixelfed` do not exist within the `pixelfed` project itself, the URL for the container images will change.

Before you might have something like the following in your `.env` file

```shell
DOCKER_APP_RELEASE="jippi-fork-1"
DOCKER_APP_IMAGE="ghcr.io/jippi/pixelfed"
DOCKER_APP_DEBIAN_RELEASE="bullseye"
```

Those are now

```shell
# [v0] for the least v0.x.y release of Pixelfed
# [v0.12] for the least v0.12.x release of Pixelfed
# [v0.12.1] for the v0.12.1 release of Pixelfed
DOCKER_APP_RELEASE="v0.12.1"

# changed from ghcr.io/jippi/pixelfed
DOCKER_APP_IMAGE="ghcr.io/jippi/docker-pixelfed"

# changed from "bullseye"
DOCKER_APP_DEBIAN_RELEASE="bookworm"
```

### <!-- md:flag breaking-change --> Splitting the `Dockerfile` { data-toc-label="Splitting the Dockerfile" }

v3 splits the Dockerfile into two to keep them focused, and reducing build times, by having higher cache utilization.

* One for the "PHP" container ([package](https://github.com/users/jippi/packages/container/package/docker-pixelfed-php), [source](https://github.com/jippi/docker-pixelfed/tree/main/images/php))
    * System packages
    * PHP
    * PECL extensions
    * Composer
* One for the [`runtime`](../customize/runtimes.md) Pixelfed container ([package](https://github.com/jippi/docker-pixelfed/pkgs/container/docker-pixelfed), [source](https://github.com/jippi/docker-pixelfed/tree/main/images/pixelfed))
    * Pixelfed Source Code
    * Apache / nginx / FPM
    * Docker Entrypoint (and it's scripts)

This should not directly impact most users, as any custom build you did before (custom PHP extensions, frontend, etc.) can still be done against the [`runtime`](../customize/runtimes.md) Docker image.

### <!-- md:flag breaking-change --> No `latest` tags { data-toc-label="No 'latest' tags" }

`latest` tags are typically pretty dangerous to use, especially in a fast-moving project such as Pixelfed where things might break in patch releases.

Instead, we now offer the following tags

* `v{major}-{runtime}-{php_version}`
    * For example `v0-apache-8.3` will always point to the *latest* `0.x` release of Pixelfed, using PHP 8.3 and Apache.
    * This tag is **mutable** when any new `0.x.y` release is created from Pixelfed (e.g. `0.15.4`).
    * This tag is **mutable** if a new `docker-pixelfed` release is cut for any `0.x.y` Pixelfed release.
* `v{major}.{minor}-{runtime}-{php_version}`
    * For example `v0.12-apache-8.3` will always point to the *latest* `0.12.x` release of Pixelfed, using PHP 8.3 and Apache.
    * This tag is **mutable** when any new `0.12.x` release is created from Pixelfed (e.g. `0.12.4`).
    * This tag is **mutable** if a new `docker-pixelfed` release is cut for any `0.12.x` Pixelfed release.
* `v{major}.{minor}.{patch}-{runtime}-{php_version}`
    * For example `v0.12.1-apache-8.3`  will always point to the *latest* `0.12.1` release of Pixelfed, using PHP 8.3 and Apache.
    * This tag is **immutable** to any Pixelfed code changes.
    * This tag is **mutable** if a new `docker-pixelfed` release is cut for this Pixelfed release.
* `v{tag}`
    * For example `v0.12.1-docker1-apache-8.3` will always point to exactly the `0.12.1` release of Pixelfed with `docker1` (this projects changes).
    * This tag is **immutable** across Pixelfed and `docker-pixelfed` changes.

### <!-- md:flag breaking-change --> No `fpm` runtime { data-toc-label="No 'fpm' runtime" }

v3 only builds `apache` (with `mod_php`) and `nginx` (with `fpm`) runtimes now.

The `fpm` runtime was quite an edge-case, not likely to be relevant for majority of folks (reach out if you are missing this!)

## New or improved features

!!! tip "All the new and exciting features and capabilities. :rocket:"

    This is where we hope we can convince you that the breaking changes and migration work was worth it :heart:

### <!-- md:flag improvement-change --> Nightly builds { data-toc-label="Nightly builds" }

We will now automatically create *nightly* builds of Pixelfed from the `dev` and `staging` branches.

* `nightly-dev-{runtime}-{php_version}`
    * Always points to the latest Pixelfed commit on `staging` at the time of building the image (~8am UTC).
    * For example `nightly-dev-apache-8.3` will always point to the latest commit on `dev` branch on the most recent build date.
* `nightly-staging-{runtime}-{php_version}`
    * Always points to the latest Pixelfed commit on `staging` at the time of building the image (~8am UTC).
    * For example `nightly-staging-apache-8.3` will always point to the latest commit on `staging` branch on the most recent build date.
* `nightly-{YYYYMMDD}-dev-{runtime}-{php_version}`
    * Points to the latest Pixelfed commit on `staging` at the specific date, at the time of building the image (~8am UTC).
    * For example `nightly-20240501-dev-apache-8.3` will always point to the latest commit on `dev` branch at `2024-05-01` (May 1st 2024)
* `nightly-{YYYYMMDD}-staging-{runtime}-{php_version}`
    * Points to the latest Pixelfed commit on `staging` at the specific date, at the time of building the image (~8am UTC).
    * For example `nightly-20240501-staging-apache-8.3` will always point to the latest commit on `staging` branch at `2024-05-01` (May 1st 2024)
